The school-related discussion over the last week or so among students has been almost entirely relating to one subject- bags. The instruction relating to students being disallowed from bringing their bags to class or leaving them around school is extremely unpopular among almost the entire student body, so much so that one year group (apparently) decided to boycott the instruction entirely. Although I personally have rarely taken my bags to and usually use my locker, I can see that the student body obviously feels very strongly about this issue, and the student council should meet with the secondary leadership team to discuss the issue.


First of all, may I make it clear that I personally am not set against the instruction for the sake of opposing it. This school is not some sort of democratically representative assembly: if it was it would be called the Chinese International Parliament. Our teachers are there to teach us, and we, the students, are here to learn from the teachers. The secondary leadership has the absolute and complete right to ignore all complaints by the student body, and could decide on behalf of us that bags are not allowed. However, they should at least take into consideration the views of nearly a thousand secondary students.


It is also the job of the Student Council to discuss the issue with the leadership of the school. It is for them to act as if they were all of us combined into four people. We all see the reasons for the instruction, which are theft and safety, but are bags on top of lockers (as many are now) really less vulnerable to theft than bags in other places? And why do safety considerations apply inside classrooms; could it not be simply made a rule to place all bags under the desks, thereby preventing teachers (and students) from tripping over them? It simply does not make sense that a student with a locker on the 8th or 9th floor should be forced to return to their lockers after class at 3.00 pm, if they have just had a lesson on the 3rd, 2nd or even 1st floor? Rules must apply to common sense, certainly, so some restriction on carrying bags would be appropriate. But I do not think that it is necessary to restrict absolutely all movement with bags.


I repeat that the secondary leadership has the absolute right to ignore all complaints on the subject.  But surely a compromise that is satisfactory to all could be accomplished? Could it not be instead instructed that students cannot leave their bags blocking entrances or hallways, and must keep them under desks in classrooms? I could be promised that any bags not abiding by these rules be taken to the secondary office and the offending students punished. It simply makes more sense that while reasonable restrictions apply, the wishes of the student body could also prevail? I would urge the Student Council to raise the issue with the secondary leadership, in order to solve the answer for once and for all.
