The UK General Election on 6th May this year should be won by the Conservatives, and for a very good reason. Thirteen years of debt and irresponsibility should end now. Labour’s big government- a bad government- has led to little. It has been a lesson to the world- a lesson that no-one needs big government. What is big government? It means taking control of people’s lives- taking over companies, banks, and homes, building expensive and national social welfare programs- not giving the people a change to have the little decisions of what school to go to, what doctor to see when they are ill. It means a welfare state- a type of system that simply cannot last for long. What countries need is a small government, a government that will involve the people, a government that promises to do what is right and can prove that it will. Such a party exists with the Conservatives.
The present opposition offers what the country and the world needs- a government that is strong enough both in terms of unity and in terms of ability to govern. The Conservatives promise to cut the deficit much faster than Labour, to ‘get the country working’ by cutting corporate tax and getting less welfare and more work’. They are focusing on tax breaks for married couples and by hitting harder at crime. They plan to create smaller and better schools that are half-state and half- private run. These are the sorts of policies that are needed, and the sorts of policies that the Conservatives offer.
Some people may ask, ‘Why do we need change now?’ The answer is that Britain and the world are emerging from a financial crisis. A Labour government has already increased the deficit and ensured that the British economy went into deep recession and then emerged from it later than even they themselves forecast. Then they say, ‘Give us another chance. This time we’ll do it right’. Why should anyone trust them now?
The sixth largest country in the world by GDP needs a new leader that is prepared to take the ‘tough choices’, as the Leader of the Conservatives himself says. It needs a strong government that can work with everyone to get that country out of its economic troubles. There is one leader and one party that will do this- and they are David Caemron and the Conservative Party.
