The DPRK (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea) is an oxymoron of itself. The Dictatorship of Propagating Random Kommunists is a more appropriate name for the little state that doesn’t seem to realise three things: first, that the whole world (except China) hates the North Korean leaders; secondly, that the rest of the world (China) is embarrassed by them, and thirdly, that the people of both Koreas hate them too. So why have they decided to provoke further conflict that they could barely hope to win? They obviously don’t realise that their neighbours to the South have an economy 400 times the size of their own, and that these large neighbours are allies with an economy 7000 times their size (the USA).  Maybe not such good people to pick a fight with.
 
So why have tensions been rising over the last year or so? Well, it started when North Korea sank a South Korean ship in March. It hardly made anyone feel particularly kindly towards them. And then there have been a couple of disputes since then, one, I seem to remember, being an exchange of small-arm shots. And last but not least, a couple of days ago a US Nuclear scientist was shown sophisticated uranium enriching plants in North Korea- one step in the chain of what is needed to develop nuclear weapons.
 
And so, finally, North Korea decides to shell a South Korean Island, and South Korea shells back. North Korea kills two South Korean soldiers and two civilians. No-one knows how many people the South Koreans kill. But the basics are what we all know: North Korea is behaving like a spoilt child again.
 
And why? Because they are being spoiled. Partly because China is- at least in theory- supporting them, and no-one- not even America- wants to pick a fight with China. Partly because the West is appeasing North Korea, although that is not entirely their fault: they still don’t know whether North Korea has any nuclear weapons. But because they are being so spoiled, North Korea has not learned to mature and to think realistically, and so they continue to be a pain in the neck to the rest of the world. One possible solution- China abandons its alliance?
