On the dark and cold morning of 6th June, 1944, only a few days more than sixty-five years ago, 159,000 British, Canadian and American soldiers huddled into their small landing craft that would take them to the beaches of Normandy, in France. Thousands of transport aircraft and gliders had earlier that morning landed airborne divisions inland to capture strategic points. They soon landed, and attacked the German positions, resulting in many casualties on both sides; about ten thousand on either side were killed or wounded. On ‘Omaha’ beach in particular, allocated to the American 1st and 29th Infantry Divisions, there were extremely heavy casualties- 5,000 out of 50,000 American men were killed or wounded as they attacked the machine-gun emplacements.
What was the reason for this slaughter? For five years, Britain, Canada, at the beginning France, and later on America had been fighting Nazi Germany under Hitler and Imperial Japan. Now that hundreds of thousands of American troops had arrived in Britain, ready for an invasion of Europe, to aid the British Army, victory in Europe was in sight. British and American military and political leaders prepared for the final blow which would hopefully take Germany out of the war- the most carefully planned top secret offensive invasion ever undertaken- D- Day.
Huge measures were made to stop the Nazi leaders and their spies getting the information of where the troops where to land. Almost the whole of Southern England was cordoned off, with only soldiers allowed inside. Despite half a million men taking part in this Operation, miraculously the Nazi leaders did not know exactly where the invasion would take place.
However, every beach in France was, under Hitler’s orders, guarded day and night against the invasion everyone knew was coming. This was the reason that so many men lost their lives that day. And it was not only that day. The next eleven months were spent fighting their way into Germany, with a Russian Army on the other side, in a giant pincer movement, but every inch of the way was paid for in Allied soldier’s blood. If the leaders in London and Washington foresaw a speedy end to the war after their invasion, they were wrong.
Was it needed, is the question people still wonder. Should the leaders have not made the land safer to attack before they attacked?
Those who were killed on D-Day, during the rest of the Invasion of Europe, and indeed throughout the entire war, serve to tell us that war is a terrible thing that should not have happened. If Hitler had never been elected into Germany, the war would never have happened, but as he had, and there was a war. Of course it would have been better if no-one had ever thought about war in the first place, but as they had, perhaps it was needed. Perhaps the men and women and children who died did serve a purpose. They served to free the world, to try and stop more people being killed- for freedom and life for their friends and family and world, even if they lost their own in the process.
