A couple of weeks ago, British Member of the European Parliament Nigel Farage gave a speech in the European parliament describing the recently chosen President of the European Council, the Belgian Herman van Rompuy. He directly told Mr. Van Rompuy ‘You have the charisma of a damp rag, and the appearance of a low grade bank clerk’. Farage told Van Rompuy that no-one in Europe had ever heard of him, and that Belgium was ‘pretty much a non-country’. (See http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/8535252.stm for Farage’s speech).
 The immediate response inside the chamber was a set of jeers from practically everyone inside. Van Rompuy replied later on that ‘there is one contibution that I can only hold in contempt, but I’m not going to comment further’.
 Now, Nigel Farage finds himself swimming in a sea of troubles, or so it may seem at first. He was nearly suspended from the European Parliament, but instead was reprimanded and lost his pay for ten days (around 3,000 Euros). It may seem that it was stupid to give a speech like this when he knew what could happen to him.
 There are two possible reasons why Farage may have decided to give this seemingly mad speech. The first, and the one Farage himself says is the true reason, was because he really thinks this way about Van Rompuy. It is true that Van Rompuy was almost unknown outside Belguim until he was chosen to represent Europe on the world stage in December- completely unknown compared to other contenders for the job, including ex- British prime minister Tony Blair. It is also true that Nigel Farage belongs to an extremely anti-European British party, the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), whose main policy is the withdrawal of Britain from the European Union.
 However, the second- and far more likely- reason is one centered in Britain itself. In only two months time, Britain will be facing a general election. The UKIP hopes to get itself a few seats in the House of Commons in this election, as so far it has no seats in the main governing centre of Britain. The UKIP has been growing in the last few years, and Nigel Farage has hopes of winning himself a seat in the House of Commons- far more valuable and important to a British politician than a seat in the European Parliament. By making Europe focus on him and drawing himself to the centre of attention, he is making himself known, increasing his chances of winning a seat in the House of Commons in May. Thank goodness, therefore, that last week Lord Ashcroft’s tax affairs became a major political issue in Britain, for this draws public attention off the UKIP.
 In the words of David Cameron, the Leader of the Opposition in Britain, members of the UKIP are ‘fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists’. While this may be a bit of an exaggeration, there is some truth in that statement. The UKIP should not have representation in the House of Commons, and hopefully, despite Nigel Farage’s plans, they will not.
