While campaigning in the Greater Manchester town of Rochdale, Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown got into a conversation with the 65 year old woman, Gillian Duffy. Little did he know that this typical face-to-face encounter would be the biggest mistake of his campaign. She asked him about the deficit and Labour’s immigration policy, but was apparently not satisfied with the result. Leaving in his car, he said goodbye and how nice it was to meet her, and normally, that would have been the end of it. What he didn’t realise was that a Sky News microphone was still on his shirt, and that it was on, and being listened to.
When inside the car, thinking he was gone from the media, he said, “That was a disaster”- how true that would turn out to be- “They should never have put me with that woman…It’s just ridiculous”. Someone in the car asked him what Mrs. Duffy had asked, to which he said, “Everything. She’s just a sort of bigoted woman.” Within half an hour, the news was screaming around world headlines. It’s something that that newspapers love- someone making a big, embarrassing gaffe
This could be serious. The last time something like this happened was in 2001, when then-deputy prime minister John Prescott had an egg thrown at him and responded by turning round and punching the man in the jaw. But that time someone had angered him, and the public generally agreed and applauded him, and Labour won the election. This time, however, no-one is supporting Brown, least of all the other parties. Conservative Shadow Chancellor George Osborne said, “That’s the thing about general elections. They reveal the truth about people.” I don't completely agree with Osborne, and to be honest I feel a bit sorry for Brown- it was the sort of mistake anyone could make. Nevertheless, if it provides Brown with a lower share of the vote, this gaffe could give the Conservatives a boost, and this is, I think, what they should have. So perhaps this will give Cameron what he wants, and if it does, that is good, even though the advantage comes from the wrong reason- from his own mistakes and not from faults in his policies.
