Last Tuesday, 6th April, Gordon Brown asked the Queen to dissolve parliament and called a general election for the 6th May. Five years after the last general election and three years after Tony Blair resigned as prime minister letting Brown take over the country is looking at its choices for the next government. They could try to have the Liberal Democrats, led by Nick Clegg, who promise many social reforms that some people think would greatly aid Britain’s economic and social recovery. Or they could have the present main opposition party, the Conservatives under David Cameron, who plan to cut spending to aid Britain’s recovery and are at the moment leading the polls. They could have Brown and his Labour Party again. Labour has given itself a good record in a number of areas including university attendance, growth of GDP, and getting Britain out of the recession that has damaged the world. Some people think that he is the best option- Labour has, after all, won the last three elections and with Brown as a senior figure in the party, and some people think that he will really manage to help Britain and her economy. I, however, do not.
In thirteen years of a Labour government, Britain has had its national debt doubled, its economy wrecked and seen many strikes, job losses and cuts in wages. For the past thirteen years Britain has been swimming in a sea of troubles created by Labour- a sea full of debt, useless spending and government waste. Now it is time for a change. Now it is time for a new leader and a new government that will help to get the country out of recession and give it a booming economy. Labour was given a chance- and has now lost it. Debt is now at 54% of GDP, with a likelihood of it growing to 81% by next year with another Labour government. People thought that the budget of 24th March might give some hope of redemption to Labour. It has done the opposite- Labour announced a deficit of 176 billion pounds, and government spending has grown at a time when it needed to do the opposite. You might think that with this record there would be a landslide defeat looming for Brown, but in fact, according to present polls, the Conservative party has not quite gained all the support it needs.
Latest polls show around 39% of the voters plan to vote Conservative, 30% Labour, 20% Liberal Democrat and 11% for other parties. If in every seat in the House of Commons there was a nine-point shift towards the Conservative party, this would give the Conservatives 312 seats (an increase of 114 on last election), Labour 257 seats (-99), the Liberal Democrats 51 (-11) and other parties 30 (no change). While this shows that there would be more Conservative Seats than Labour seats, the Conservatives would not have a majority in the House, what a party really needs to run the country properly- for that they would need 326 seats. That magic number is exactly what they are aiming for- and what, in my opinion, they should get.
How and why should they get this? Find out in the next article.
