A recent article by Isaac Lee says that the conservatives have left all notion of a small government behind them. Moreover, he claims that it is the Liberal Democrats who offer the real small government. This is simply not true. Isaac has decided to pick off little points that suit his argument. Now I will try to wreck these points and add my own.
Isaac describes the conservative policy of keeping the top bracket of income tax at 50%. Excuse me, does Isaac think that there is one type of tax? Does he realise that the Conservatives plan to give tax breaks for married couples and cut inheritance tax? And, biggest of all, does he realise that Labour’s planned rise of National Insurance- an incredible tax on jobs that is ridiculous- will be scrapped under the Conservatives, and that hundreds of Britain’s most important businesses agree with him? It is ridiculous to argue that the Conservatives offer a bigger government than Labour. So instead isaac chose to say that the lib Dems give a real small government.
What do they offer? They want to scrap Trident. I don’t know if Isaac realises that Trident is Britain’s nuclear defence system- without this, there would be no nuclear deterrent, and Britain would give up her position on the world stage. OK, scrapping it would save lots of money- while we’re about it, why don’t we abolish the entire army? That would save money, and is what Isaac is arguing. Isaac says that “Nick Clegg opposed the costly war in Iraq and Afghanistan, and will oppose another costly war in Iran.” What? Who mentioned a war against Iran?
The Lib Dems also propose to get Britain into the Euro. That, I am afraid, is completely ridiculous. A serious political party could not possibly propose this. That might almost be a policy of the Monster Raving Loony party- a joke political party that has many ridiculous policies. The Euro, especially after the EU bailed out Greece, will soon fall in trust and will loose much of its value. The Euro started off it’s history well, but that history will end soon.
So the Lib Dems only offer no change. What is more, a vote for the Lib Dems in fact aids in getting Labour back into power, as the electoral system means that the Conservatives would not manage to gain enough Labour seats for a majority for themselves. Whatever Isaac Lee and Nick Clegg say, it will be a two horse race and one that the conservatives should win.
