Chinese, a compulsory subject in CIS, is taught in a very diverse manner within the MYP context. Subject material, although mainly revolving around a textbook, may include anthologies of short stories and photocopied extracts. Texts studied range from informational, scientific essays, to classical Chinese poems. Some keywords or phrases of the text might be circled. A myriad of tasks may be done with those words: dictation, sentence construction, writing a definition and corresponding pinyin, translation to modern Chinese, and penmanship. Whole paragraphs might have to be memorized. Deciphering classical Chinese is challenging enough, let alone memorizing it.
The essay and the written test are two core components of assessment. The essay can be broken down to the analytical, creative, and argumentative forms of writing. Content, organization, and language are three equally weighted criteria upon the essay is judged by. Assessment is blurrier for the test, as the student would usually get a mark out of 100, rather than three grades like in an essay. Other forms of assessment may include an oral presentation, though that is rare.
Chinese is unique with the very wide range of aptitude between students within one year. Six to seven levels of standards can be identified. Although the obvious difference is in difficulty level, most people would find the subject equally challenging, as the class they are placed in is relative to their personal Chinese capabilities. Mobility is possible, as the very top, or very bottom, of each class has the chance to move to a more suitable level every semester, when standardization tests are taken. Class size may vary from less than ten, to fully packed at 22.
The complexity of the Chinese language itself is the source of many qualms students have with the subject. Based on pictograms rather than phonics, words are harder to read and write. Coupled with countless homonyms, this handicap limits the sophistication of analysis and appreciation towards texts. Unfortunately, that is something that cannot be easily solved when a billion other people use and increasingly important language.
