All Year 11s were presented with a ring after this year’s Middle Year Program (MYP) graduation dinner. The words “My Youth Perished” were inscribed on the ring, a play on the MYP acronym. Although the words are exaggerative in nature- there are many years of IB and university life after five years of MYP- it reflects a genuine frustration. This essay will briefly examine and analyze the greatest point of contention: the Reflection. Rather than focusing on the fairness of reflections, as in a previous e:CLIPSE article, I will look into reflections from a student’s perspective.
 
The intentions of reflections are good, and perhaps most students understand that. The International Baccalaureate lists reflections as a method to “allow students to demonstrate achievement.” This is in accordance to holistic learning, a guiding philosophy of the MYP, which requires all aspects of the individual to be active in the learning process. In theory, the individual will improve in his work processes and any outcomes of such work by reflecting.
But cynicism spawns when theory and practice diverge. In reality, reflections are work, not just a complement to work. They are literally mini-essays, and take time and effort to produce. In the Arts, the fact that the criteria “Reflections and Evaluation” is equally graded along with “Knowledge and Understanding” implies that we are to spend equal amount of energy to reflecting as to increasing our knowledge of the subject matter. But from experience, the fact that reflections have to be consistently created, one per Arts class, means that students spend more time reflecting than researching material or training skills. This is because assessments of Knowledge and Understanding are much less frequent to the continuous reflecting process. In subjects without reflections as a formal criterion, such as English and History, full attention can be devoted to reading the subject material or producing work. I would use the analogy of the income tax. The more money earned in an income, the total amount of taxes due increases. Similarly, the more amount of lessons spent and the more work completed, the total amount of reflections due increases.
But why do reflections in particular receive targeted apprehension, and not tests or essays? It may be because the actual objectives of reflections are yet to be realized for many. This is due to the independence of reflections from other criteria. A student may score low on reflections, and high on application or knowledge, or vice versa. The actual authenticity of a reflection is hard to verify as reflecting is a very subjective and personal process. The compulsory nature of reflections in certain subjects compounds the problem of authenticity, since students may have to create narratives to answer many necessary guiding questions in reflecting. Additionally, every expected reflection may be crammed and written after all work has been done, just before the due date, and full marks may be achieved. If that is possible, it defeats the purpose of reflecting as an ongoing process.
Hence, being a good reflector, in grade terms, does not ensure actual improvement in work, despite the aforementioned intention of reflecting. In Design Technology and Computer Technology, the evaluations at the end of each Design Cycle are the final stage of any unit. But since there is no requirement or expectation to carry forward what has been learnt through an evaluation to future units, the purpose of such evaluations are defeated. If such a process can be manipulated, there is no wonder why some students are disillusioned with spending many hours on work which may not contribute to their actual performance.
