What is vital to the preservation of academic honesty is the structure that facilitates students and teachers. In CIS, there is extensive internal moderation to fairly assess students’ work and to standardize the marking of teachers. External moderation further allows subjects to be assessed in an equitable fashion with the rest of the world. This is essential as the Middle Years Program (MYP) relies on continuous assessments, rather than a large exam at the end of the curriculum that is purely moderated externally.
It is fairer to have a series of assessments to demonstrate students’ capabilities as it would reflect a broader and more consistent perspective of achievement, rather than a single exam to decide the future of their academic careers. The extensive assessments of bibliographies, reflective work, and original and independent projects also hinder the chances of academic dishonesty. Clearly, the structure of CIS in the MYP-years is one where traditional forms of academic dishonesty such as cheating and plagiarism have little chance of being significant. Ultimately, this provides accuracy and clarity to the final levels of achievement awarded to students, useful for schools and universities.
However, the uniqueness of the MYP structure opens room for interpretation regarding subjects and their corresponding assessments amongst laymen, such as parents. For example, someone unacquainted with MYP Mathematics would expect that achievement in Mathematics would be assessed on the application of knowledge and skills in straightforward questions typically seen in exams. The reality is that such knowledge comprise of 8/28 of the total grade. It is folly to regard a student’s given grade as a measure of achievement on pure “Knowledge and Understanding” of Mathematics. Rather, it is very important to note that levels of achievement of Mathematics as an MYP subject considers the student’s abilities within pattern recognition, communication, and reflection. Therefore, if a student is said to be “excellent at Maths” under MYP, he is actually excellent in the aggregation of knowledge and understanding, pattern recognition, communication, and reflection as it pertains to Mathematics.
The differences between traditional ways of thinking about a subject and the MYP method of assessing achievement are numerous. In the Arts subjects, artistic application and knowledge are nearly equal in importance to that of reflection and personal engagement. In Computer and Design Technology, the performance within the Design Cycle is paramount, rather than pure Computer or Design related skills. Hence, a new paradigm of thinking about subjects has to be put forth in order for widespread clarity regarding subjects amongst laypersons. In conclusion, academic honesty and clarity go hand in hand, as they aim to paint an accurate picture of students’ true abilities.
