The Year 12 Geography Study on Braemar Hill Congestion1 confirms many suspicions: private cars cause the massive traffic in Braemar Hill. There are some shocking results: 92%, or 330 out of 358 of vehicles entering CIS are taxis and private cars. The peak travelling time for the 1100m journey from Tin Hau Road to Hau Yuen Path is 20 minutes. Travelling time is multiplied by 13 times during peak hours- a normal journey takes only one and a half minutes. The effects on our time notwithstanding, the mass of cars increases noise levels by a whole 20 decibels (dB), peaking at nearly 85dB. This noise level is far above the upper limit for hearing conversation, and is sandwiched between the noise from a food blender and an alarm clock.
The results are even sadder when you consider the immense room for improvement. Only 46% of the student body takes the school bus. According to the CIS Traffic Survey Results2, the absence of available bus routes is hardly a problem, affecting only 19% of private car users. The quality of service of Jackson Bus Company is not in question either, with above average ratings from bus-taking respondents. What is the primary reason for private car use? 65% of both parent and student respondents responded with the vague option of “Flexibility”, followed by the more frank answer of “Have Driver” at 47%. Clearly, using private cars is a socioeconomic issue, rather than one of necessity. Cars display status, and especially so in Hong Kong when public transport renders private transport unnecessary. As a friend astutely noted, “the lesson from this is not to put so many rich kids in one school”.
But private transport is probably a rational choice for individuals themselves. Isn’t the wish to wake up later and to have flexible schedule a legitimate reason? However, when many people think similarly, Braemar Hill clogs up with hundreds of private cars. This dilemma is a case of the Tragedy of the Commons. This economic concept describes a situation where individual rational decisions will make everyone worse off in the long run when a common resource is depleted – in this case, Braemar Hill’s roads. Bus-takers suffer from having to wake up earlier just to beat the traffic. Another good example would be overfishing. Independent fishers would want to fish as much as possible in the short run to maximize profits. But everyone thinking in this way will destroy fishing stocks and the fisher’s livelihoods in the long run. No fisher benefits from this, just as how no member of the CIS community benefits from congestion.
What can be done for CIS? The Traffic Committee’s numerous recommendations would hopefully decrease congestion in Braemar Hill. Restricting drop-off zones and establishing hub stops are two methods to encourage, rather then coerce, limiting private car use.
But even the recommendations suggest that “most families with drivers are unlikely to respond to incentives to ride the bus”. Since such a huge percentage of students take private transport, the habit goes unquestioned beyond sporadic Car Free Days organized by the Green Group. Even the 20-strong Green Group has five members who take private transport.  Awareness is hardly the problem, since congestion affects all every single day. The issue is the lack of action on the part of students. To complement the any of the Traffic Committee’s recommendations, environmentally minded students should be willing to take a stand and agitate for change.
Firstly, the Green Group and other eco-groups can purge their own ranks of members that do not practice what they preach. Then, there can be public demonstrations against private car use, emulating the massive participation in the “Walk for Change” held two years ago to raise awareness of the Copenhagen climate change conference. The difference will be that the next “Walk for Change” should be targeted towards the CIS community, held on a school day and preferably during the 20-minute long congestions along Braemar Hill. And rather than being a one-off event, having repeated marches would instill a heavier message. Such a protest should reduce private transport to the level of littering, smoking and other bad habits. Private transport has to become ‘uncool’ every single day, rather than on select car-free days. With a change in consciousness combined with increased incentives, we can gradually stamp out this tragedy of the commons.
