Francis Newman posed an interesting question regarding the Korean incident: “why have [the North Koreans] decided to provoke further conflict that they could barely hope to win?” The North Koreans are simply doing their part in grabbing world attention once again. The recent Korean shelling of Yeonpyeong Island is the latest in a long list of provocative acts:  the sinking of the Cheonan, the testing of nuclear bombs and ballistic missiles, and the opening of a uranium enrichment facility. Each of these incidents resulted in the same cycle of condemnation, sanction, re-engagement, and ultimately, humanitarian aid for starving North Koreans. North Korea is indeed a spoilt child. They cry for attention, get a slap on the wrist, and receive treats from the biggest powers of the world. Why grow food when you can demand for it at gunpoint?
 
Every country can stop the cycle by refusing to heed the North’s provocations. Yes, the North Korean state may collapse, causing an untold number of refugees to stream across the borders into China and South Korea. But since both countries can afford to prop up North Korea through aid, surely they can accommodate refugees with temporary food and shelter. Tiny Hong Kong could contain hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese boat people. In any desperate attempt at invasion, the North Koreans will starve in the face of the richer, technologically superior South.The better alternative is of course a truly reformed North Korea, but such reform cannot be achieved by perpetuating the status quo. 
 
Kim Jong-il has been trolling the United States incessantly over the past two decades, yet the United States is still firm in repeating the cycle of provocation and aid. President Obama called the DPRK "a serious and ongoing threat that needs to be dealt with.” To think that they are a threat that requires the full attention of the United States is ridiculous. North Korea no longer has the backing of the Soviets or even the Chinese, who simply want stability. After 60 years of cease-fire, the Cold War is over and South Korea is now a prosperous state, able to stand up on its own feet. The 28,000 American troops stationed in the South are as superfluous as they are wasteful. Doesn’t Obama have a 1.3 trillion-dollar deficit to worry about?  
