From Hospet, the India tour traveled to Badami. From there we visited the Badami Caves, an impressive complex of sandstone temples that was older than the Hampi ruins by half a millennium. A clean lake along with a picturesque town complimented the cave temples in a red sunset. In the next day, we visited Aihole and Pattadakal, temple complexes renowned for being the origins of architecture throughout the region. It is difficult to fathom that ancient peoples treated such sophisticated temples as centers of living and social interaction.
When we came back to Hampi later on a five hour bus ride, we had to perform our service activities. The first was in Hampi Children’s Trust, an NGO providing basic necessities to street children. The small children performed a large variety of elaborate dances. The fact that there were so many of the street children meant that the performance as a whole lasted for about an hour. It is quite a contrast to what we prepared for them, which were simple songs and fun interaction.
For our second service activity, we visited the local Don Bosco School, a Catholic institution. The school’s facilities were impressive, containing tailoring, ironworking, and even electrical engineering rooms. Vocational training was provided to masses of children of our age. The children, who enter the school for free, were mostly from poor backgrounds. Happy and energetic, they appear extremely pleased to live in the school rather than working in an iron mine to augment their parent’s meager income.
We rode the overnight train again to Bangalore, and unfortunately I took the cramped top berth this time around. In Bangalore we visited the zoo, and it was quite a sight when we saw white tigers, black bears, and sleeping lions only a few feet away from the bus, to be quickly photographed in all poses. Our last meal was tear-inducing form of chicken rice, much spicier than even the average food we ate in India. Overall, the India it was quite a relaxing and rewarding experience as explored a neighboring, yet quite different, culture in its present and past form.
