In his article, Francis Newman expressed support for the Conservative Party in the 2010 UK General Elections due to the fact that they are for small government. Alas, the Conservative Party is just as statist as the other parties. There really is little fundamental difference between the three major parties regarding the role of government, whilst all three major parties share the same orthodox views. The recent televised “debate” was a chat about tweaking policies, more like rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic, rather than moving it off course of the iceberg of debt.
Whilst Conservative supporters may decry the big government and the welfare state, the Conservatives will in fact just expand it. For example, they promise to increase real spending of the National Health Service every year. They aim for a so-called “Big Society”, only to be guided with government through paternalistic programs such as the “Big Society Bank”, the “National Citizen Service”, and the “Big Society Day”, just to name a few. If the Conservatives were truly for a smaller government, they will not need to establish new institutions and programs to supplement the many that already exist. The Tories talk about cutting taxes, yet will keep the top income tax rate at 50%. David Cameron repeatedly mentions on ‘efficiency savings’, again focusing on minute issues whilst ignoring the larger idea regarding the role of government. Furthermore, they seek to arbitrarily cap immigration and introduce more police into the streets, even in the current surveillance state. Those are policies that purely increase the government intervention.
Ironically, the largest cut in a government program offered in their televised debate comes from the Liberal Democrats’ Nick Clegg, who will not renew the Trident nuclear program, which will cost 100 billion pounds. Indeed, Nick Clegg opposed the costly war in Iraq and Afghanistan, and will oppose another costly war in Iran. Hence, the Liberal Democrats will probably be the least wasteful in terms of blood and treasure overseas. In fact, achieving a smaller government will probably be more likely with a hung parliament, where neither party gains an overall majority, as parties will have to compromise in passing laws. With more compromise, less of each party’s statist agendas will pass, and hence result in a smaller government than would occur if either party gains a majority. Strategically, a voter who is concerned with the size of government will vote for the Liberal Democrats, not due to their policies or principles, but in order to achieve a hung parliament.
