MYP Computer Technology is an interesting subject, as it places heavy emphasis on the process of work. In the earlier years of MYP, students learn how to perform fundamental tasks on the computer, namely: word processing, Flash animation, webpage construction, video editing, spreadsheets, and more. The teacher provides some in-class guidance, but I find that the majority of work produced is based on answering questions in an extensive project briefing. The guidance of the project handout is more pronounced in the last two years of MYP, when students undertake “Miniprojects”, where they can pursue any area of computer technology they like. Here, the teacher is more of a facilitator, as different students have different interests. The structure of each unit revolves around the ‘Design Cycle’, which divides the unit into several distinct stages: Investigation, Design, Plan, Create, and Evaluate. Accordingly, each stage is awarded a grade out of six. An additional criterion, ‘Attitudes in Technology’ is weighted equally with the other criteria.
Clearly, a large portion of the student’s attention is placed less on the technical, computing skills. Rather, the multi-stage Design Cycle is far more important. The work is compiled in a ‘Design Folder’, which in later years can reach over 50 pages and at least fifteen thousands words. The IBO instructed procedures needed to create a product, as simple as a PowerPoint, is immense and pedantic. As the course gets more self-driven, the larger the disparity in skills learnt. After all, it matters little if someone chooses to create a sophisticated website as opposed to a simple video tutorial. In both cases, students can ace the Design Cycle despite a large difference in skills applied. Therefore, people are incentivized to create ‘easier’ products in light of the foreshadowed workload involved, which includes the ‘process journal’, a session-by-session write-up crucial to the Create stage.
However, there are indeed benefits when adopting such an emphasis to the process. The Design Cycle is a helpful way of handling projects, as it goes through the logical steps to apply technical skills in realistic contexts. Products may not be limited to Computer related ones, but also merchandise, services, and more in other fields of work. As it can be applied in many areas, even those who do not pursue an IT career in the future could find it useful. Ideally, the Design Cycle fosters innovation, improvement, and critical thinking. This is because the student has to identify and investigating into the problem, suggest multiple solutions to the problem, and choose and evaluate the solution itself.
