A new video went viral within the past week- Friday by Rebecca Black. So far, 26 million views have been recorded on Youtube. Rather than being an exemplar of wit or creativity, Friday went viral due to how bad it is. You don’t have to be a musical connoisseur to understand this. Aside from the heavily auto-tuned lyrics or the silliness of having thirteen-year olds drive cars, it is the absurd lyrics that make Friday a prime target of ridicule. They are not absurd in that they don’t make sense- the lyrics are so comprehensively silly and trivial that it makes people question why someone bothered to make a seemingly professional video out of them. One section stands out from all others:
 
“Yesterday was Thursday, Thursday Today is Friday, Friday (Partyin’) … Tomorrow is Saturday And Sunday comes afterwards”
 
Friday could be taken as satire if it isn’t for the fact that the video’s producers, Ark Music Factory, are actually dedicated to discovering teen talent in music. Wealthy parents pay the production company a fee in the hopes of discovering talent in their still youthful children.
 
Chien He Wong’s (12LZ) editorial in the 3rd Xiaohua issue, The Hollywood Rule of Dumb, touches upon the degenerating standards of contemporary pop culture. In the editorial, Chien decries the “Twilight-Bieber drones” that dominate pop culture with inane lyrics and impersonal, contrived love stories. The fact that the video was professionally produced testifies to what some producers perceive teen tastes to be. Twilight-Bieber probably led the music industry into believing that teenagers have the “miserably limited creative capacities” that Chien ascribes to his generation. It is no coincidence that Black’s “Friday, Friday…” sounds so similar to Justin Bieber’s “Baby, baby…” Black even suggested a duet between her and Justin Bieber in an ABC news interview.
 
Common consensus even amongst teens has so far ridiculed Friday. But Friday is an extreme example, repudiating it alone will not reverse any trends in the industry. It takes a ton of negative receptions to show producers that tastes have changed. Perhaps this is just the first on the chopping block of a new pop culture.
