Team Zero won the Student Council elections with 44% of the vote, followed by Team 8 with a 25% share, Team Phi at 16%, and the rest split between Team 360 and 1. How did Team Zero win, and by such a large margin? During the week preceding election day, it seemed as if the race would be close between Team Zero and 8. I would often hear of “Zero or 8” when voters were asked beforehand which team to pick. This is unsurprising, as 8 had an overall larger, more diverse quantity of campaign material, with plentiful posters and dominating sculptures near the car park and cafeteria. Team 8’s advertised ideas of Frozen Yogurt sales and a Nap Room seemed to be popular. But Team 8 did not fulfill its high expectations during the presentation that occurred one day before voting. They had a lackluster speech, which was delivered quickly and was entirely concerned with the policies proposed. Team 8 also made a severe error by not dimming the gymnasium lights during the campaign video screening, as most of their video was shot in darkness. The final result was everyone barely seeing anything in the video, which was shot using the innovative “light painting” process. Team Zero’s speech was largely about the team members themselves. Their video was as personal as their speeches, as many shots were solely of the team members speaking to the camera. Zero’s overall presentation had a consistent focus of personality, and perhaps people were attracted more to personality rather than policy. With Zero’s more effective presentation over 8, many of the ‘Zero or 8’ voters leaned towards Zero instead. In fact, Team Phi’s very effective video opened the “Phi or Zero” option as well, drawing away even more voters from 8. There were a few factors that led Team Zero to be a frontrunner before the presentations. Firstly, Zero had a ‘natural advantage’ of siblings to rely on. Zero’s team members, along with their closest Year 12 supporters, had at least three siblings in the younger years. Each sibling, having their own network of friends, can influence the vote by a few percentage points. No other team had such an advantage. Zero’s personality driven campaign was consistently reflected in their posters as well. Nearly all their posters had images of them edited in, along with a slogan such as “We care” underneath their images. Their posters were all instantly recognizable as they were shaped as a ‘0’, lending the team a personality itself. Those who do not bother to read posters closely will only realize the presence of ‘0’ posters. If anything, this year’s elections teaches us that campaigning personality is more effective than campaigning policies, that presentation is vital, and that consistency in campaigning is important.