The start of each school year is vote-harvesting time for the Student Council executive elections. This year is one of the most competitive elections since I’ve been here in Year 7. The number of teams, five, is typical. What is unique is the intense industriousness and skill of this year’s candidates.
Unlike previous years, all teams made their own massive banner, overshadowing multiple floors. Each team has a plethora of posters, covering so much of the walls that it is near impossible to find a perfectly untouched wall. Fading away are the images of Star Wars characters with a team number plastered next to them, accompanied with unfunny puns. Posters are much more sophisticated this year, many of them well photoshopped, aesthetically pleasing, and informative. In fact, this year is probably the first in a long time where many posters have the images of the candidates. This is contrast with the faceless, impersonal posters from previous years.
The propaganda machines for some teams have gone beyond traditional paper posters. No, I am not talking about online campaigning, because that has been forbidden. It is Team 8’s frozen-yogurt can sculptures and tie-dyed shirts, Team 360’s eye-catching paper “360”, and Team 0’s board of Polaroid pictures that have progressed the campaigns to new heights. Even Chinese has been used, as big-character posters are displayed in the cafeteria.
The speeches and videos on Monday will in all probability be of sophisticated levels to match the advanced pre-speech campaigning. As a Year 12, I am honored to know the candidates as peers- beyond the fancy posters, speeches and videos. With only a few days to truly prepare, the candidates are collectively one of the most hardworking people ever. They have a large amount of innovative ideas as well, ranging from student representation in the use of Annual Fund money, to frozen yogurt sales. Not only are they ideal, but are a completely attainable mix of structural and popular reforms. The collectively advanced and intense campaign demonstrates the candidates’ wide-ranging skills, in addition to their great organization and determination.
