CIS won the Senior Debating Championship last Saturday. The tournament, hosted in our school,was well organized by Sarah Pemberton and Resa Ng aided by their army of volunteers. It lasted from morning until evening, where CIS debated four different schools on five different issues. CIS won two out of the three preliminary debates, beat German Swiss International School (GSIS) in the semi-finals, and finally knocked out reigning champions La Salle in the finals.
The extraordinary achievement is added by the fact that none in the team even thought of reaching the finals, no less reaching the semi-finals. The team, coached by Mr. Kwan and comprised of Resa Ng, Joel Chi, Lorraine Leung, Justin Chan and me, was not very experienced and did not have a top-notch record. After all, CIS received 9th place, out of 22 schools, in a previous tournament. Speeches for two prepared debates were done in the last minute with not much rehearsal. The motion for the final debate was only discussed for 15 minutes a few days before, as none of us expected to be at the finals. Besides, the oratory skills of veteran debaters, such as GSIS’s Heather Pickerel and La Salle’s Ben Allen were clearly more refined than ours.
We won by a combination of raw determination, luck, and superior tactics. After the three preliminary debates, we weren’t expecting to be placed in the semi-finals, since winning only two out of three debates was traditionally not considered to be sufficient for advancement (or as I was told). The semi-finalists are chosen by a tally of points given during each debate- perhaps our defeat to GSIS at the preliminary round was due to us being slightly less good than GSIS. Our semi-finals impromptu motion with GSIS was interesting- “This House Believes that women over 45 should not be allowed assisted reproduction.” We were fortunately opposing the motion, which I thought was easier to argue for. Furthermore, Lorraine Leung had deep knowledge of the issue, having done something related for her Personal Project. The three best and most experienced debaters were chosen to battle GSIS: Joel, Resa and Lorraine.
GSIS’s arguments for the motion were strangely tenuous and shallow. One strange argument by GSIS was that blanket ban on assisted reproduction would be beneficial since doctors will no longer be tempted by money, as doctors had to screen and approve applicants for assisted reproduction. I was expecting much more from them, seeing that GSIS’s arguments against us during the preliminary round were well composed. We walked over their arguments, and the adjudication panel was unanimously in favor of CIS. At one point, we even pre-empted a possible rebuttal by GSIS, a rebuttal that they then never used. That GSIS was simply disappointing in the semi-finals worked heavily in our favor.
Then we faced La Salle. The motion was “This house believes that the media should be banned from broadcasting terrorist messages.” The sides were chosen through a flip of a coin, and we were lucky as we got to choose which side to be on (we chose the opposition).  We had 40 minutes to prepare, and made full use of it. Remember that minimal preparation had been made beforehand! Since Internet access was forbidden, we had to draw from our own knowledge as much as possible. Resa and Joel were a bit some reluctant to debate as they have been debating all day. But through some determination and persuasion, they conceded. They were our strongest debaters, and it was necessary for them to debate in the finals.
Throughout the final debate, I honestly thought La Salle would win. They had much more flair and style and clearly did research by outlining numerous examples to support their points. They had many more points to argue than we did, and their points seemed to make sense.But we prevailed in the end. The adjudicators were unanimously on CIS’s side. As they explained, it was Joel’s rhetoric as the second speaker that brought the adjudicators to our side. I would go so far and say it was Joel that managed to win the debate for us. We had few points and few examples, but we stuck with them consistently. La Salle spread themselves too far with too many points and some inapplicable examples. Perhaps their pompous and confident tone could not fool the experienced adjudicators. Our victory made clear that research and eloquence were secondary to superior technique and arguments. Substance over style prevails, and CIS was well rewarded by that.
