The December 14th protest was a significant, but un-substantive event. In preparation, Angelina Bishman coined the phrase, “My Youth Perished”.  This comprised one of the many parodies that played on the ‘MYP’ abbreviation that included “Makes You Psycho” and “Mad Young People”. Some students entered the school with signs plastered onto their backs that mocked the MYP, while others made signs during the classes before lunch.
 
At the start of lunch, the protest organizers quietly sat down in a circle on the basketball court. The circle expanded as people came from PE and other classes, bringing with them placards boasting orange backgrounds with thin black text. Students from all grades gathered to watch from the balconies. Many protesters smiled in silence as their rage was channeled through this unprecedented and defiant fashion.
 
Suddenly, the Year 11 protesters were jeered by the Year 12s above who shouted “Suck it up!” repeatedly. Although the protesters were surprised, they remained disciplined and silent. The number of protesters peaked at 32, about one quarter of the total year. Interestingly, the overwhelming majority of protesters were female. When the first male came, there were already 15 females sitting. There were many Year 11 males on the basketball court itself – playing basketball on the side rather than sitting-in.
 
Mr. Alexander and Ms. Rossiter arrived at the scene upon the jeering. The two secondary leaders spoke about the voicing of concerns through more conservative and private channels. After a few minutes, they tried to persuade the protestors to leave, commanding them to “take [their] bits of paper and wander off.” Due to this, one protest organizer felt the secondary leaders were “condescending” and “belittling.” The student protestors discussed the next course of action. It was agreed that one aim of the protest- to raise attention about the stressful workload- had been achieved. However, leaving immediately meant conforming to the expectations of authority, hardly the desirable image to be left in the wake of a peaceful and legal protest. Consequently, the protestors only left the scene a few minutes later.
 
What Was To Be Done?
 
What is it to win? To achieve your goals? If we take the underlying, anti-MYP spirit of the protestors as the criteria, it would seem like the protest achieved little. After all, the MYP is firmly entrenched and will not be going anywhere. Yet few, if any, of the protestors believed that abolishing the MYP was feasible. The more realistic goal was the lessening of stress and work.
 
The protest clearly captured the sympathies of many staff and students whilst posing problem to solve. That was why the original plan to protest at every lunch on that week was dropped. In fact, the Student Council invited representatives of the protestors to meet the secondary leadership to solve the homework issue. These representatives investigated the issue of homework, and presented scientific data showing that “the amount of homework given to us is irrelevant to how well we will do in future exams and academic excellence.”
 
According to the representatives, the meeting was a victory as they “received great support and sympathy from Mr. Alexander for our situation. After hearing our proposals, he agreed with all of the points.” These proposals were:
 
1) Formatting the homework schedule, and limiting the daily assignment of homework to 40 minutes per subject 2) Discussing reflections with the Arts department, since reflections take time and are part of homework, not an expectation
3) Setting up an online forum where teachers must post calendar dates for assessments, which are visible to other subject teachers and students. Since only ONE assessment is allowed per day, it will avoid the overwhelming 5 assessments per day situation near the reporting period.
 
These solutions were somewhat realized. A homework schedule was created, in addition to an online calendar for assessments. A number of deadlines were extended, and whole sections of the Computer Technology Java Unit were deleted. Overall, the amount of homework and stress leveled off during the immediate months after the protests, and decreased significantly in the spring of 2010. However, the workload decrease was a natural consequence of MYP's closing- the Personal Project was due at February, and much of the moderated MYP assessments were due by the end of Easter. Therefore, the lessening of the workload was expected. In addition, the homework issue was already being investigated by the Head of Year, Ms. Irvine, prior to the protest, so the above solutions might as well have been proposed, protest or not.
 
The current Year 11s are a better rubric to assess the protest. Unfortunately, they seem to be facing the similar, heavy workloads of the protestors. Bok Wai, a Year 11, notes that the situation is “like a blitzkrieg of homework”, “too sudden too fast”, where some “are perishing.” These statements are wholly reminiscent of the protestor’s grievances! In addition, he reports that both a homework timetable and calendar are absent.
 
It might seem that the protest failed to achieve anything substantial. But that is because most stress and homework are derived from MYP assessments – assessments that the IBO sets from Cardiff, Wales. This MYP-homework symbiosis means that if the MYP is not going anywhere, homework is not going anywhere.
 
Yet, the protest is still significant to this day. It is a defining event for the Class of 2012 and has been referenced in the MYP Graduation Dinner in June and the Graduation Ceremony in September. Even one year on, the protest was commemorated with a “Dress Red Day”, along with many posters outside the Year 12 common room. The organizers, who “wanted to improve the school”, showed that there were many students not afraid to set a precedent for airing grievances.
 
This article concludes the series on the December 14th Uprising. The first two articles are located below:
