The past few weeks have marked two different reactions against Islamic extremism and their role in Western society. On one hand is the appeasement of radical Islamists through Comedy Central’s self-censorship. Comedy Central, the producers of the South Park animated sitcom series, censored any depiction or reference of Muhammad in a recent South Park episode.
This follows alleged death threats against South Park creators, Trey Parker and Matt Stone, for satirizing the extreme reactions against the depictions of Muhammad in the preceding episode. If Parker and Stone wanted to make a point with their satire, they certainly succeeded by eliciting anger from Revolution Muslim, a radical group, and eliciting fear by Comedy Central, their bosses. This merely indicates the long history of double standards set in place to appease radical Islam. Other religions have been thoroughly mocked and attacked in South Park, yet no violent reactions have been elicited or any censorship exercised. It is a shame that Comedy Central will surrender their own freedom of speech in the face of a few extremists. But at least this was self-censorship- there are growing numbers of governments that have passed ‘hate speech’ laws to protect certain interests and religions.
On the other end of the fear-of-Islam spectrum, there are an increasing number of European countries seeking to ban the burqa, the full-face veil worn by fundamentalist women. For supposedly Western liberal democracies to ban particular clothing is deeply contradictory, no better than forcing clothing on people. The ban also represents a fear of fundamentalist Islam, practiced by a small segment of Muslims, if not even smaller in comparison to the whole population. But it is these types of restrictions on culture that the extremists can use as reasons to fuel anger amongst even moderates, as it seems like the government is encroaching on Islam discriminatorily.
Whilst the censorship of Muhammad represents appeasement to extremists, the hypocritical ban of burqas will just fuel anger and provide justification for the perception that there is a clash of civilizations between the Muslim and Western world.
