The recent revolution in Egypt started 2011 with a bang. After three decades in power, President Hosni Mubarak was finally overthrown after long weeks of massive protests in Alexandria and Cairo. It seemed all so sudden that the seemingly stable country faced a generational upheaval in a matter of 18 days. Mubarak was a long-time ally of the United States, receiving billions in aid that is only second to Israel. Egypt’s economy is one of the most diverse and developed in the region.
So what went wrong? One catalyst for the initial Egyptian protests was the senseless and brutal treatment of Khaled Saeed, a 28 year old computer programmer. His beating in Alexandria by security forces loyal to Mubarak was a symbol of Egypt’s poor human rights record, where torture was not out of the ordinary. Mubarak’s security forces are notorious and feared for their heavy-handedness, compared to the relatively neutral and respected Egyptian army. The “We are Khaled Saeed” group was formed on Facebook and was key to helping spread the protests. Wael Ghonim, the founder of the group, became a face of the revolution.
Mubarak’s repressive policies masked his widespread unpopularity and the pervasive anger at corruption and unemployment. Egypt’s press was given a degree of freedom, but was regarded as a ‘safety valve’ which could be shut at any time.  Internet and Facebook access was also allowed, but was shut down in late January in response to the growing protests. Egypt had elections in 2005 and 2010, but they were either rigged or restricted so that little change could occur due to voting. Mubarak cracked down on the opposition Muslim Brotherhood when it won 20% of seats in the 2005 parliamentary elections. Parties other than the ruling National Democratic Party were allowed, but were unable to pose a threat to Mubarak.
So much power resided in Mubarak that Egypt was often labeled an autocracy. Mubarak’s high position made him stubborn in the face of millions of demonstrators. But the opposition was more determined to remove Mubarak from power. They endured clashes as pro-Mubarak forces, security forces and plainclothes police attempted to crack down on the protests. They did not give up after meager, though unprecedented, concessions were offered (such as the appointment and delegation of powers to Vice-President Omar Suleiman). The protesters represented a cross section of Egypt, including the massive numbers of discontent youth. In Alexandria, both Christians and Muslims protested. Mubarak was overthrown not through ineffective official channels. The people’s only option was civil disobedience.  
With the protesters’ successes in Egypt and Tunisia, winds of change are blowing across the region. Libya’s Gadhafi looks to be next to fall, albeit with a bloodier conflict that has seen many hundreds dead. These protests are inspirational to those oppressed under top-down regimes that pay lip-service to democracy and freedom of speech. It takes a determined and popular movement to oppose autocratic figures such as Mubarak. Mubarak’s example shows that even the heavily entrenched can be toppled as they overreach the rational boundaries of power. Egypt shows that the times are a-changing and we can all be masters of our own fate.
