Robyn Treyvaud spoke about cybersafety for the Year 12 Theory of Knowledge classes and also gave talks to parents in afterschool sessions. She repeated the standard line that we always hear- don’t put too much information on the Internet. Denouncing your boss on Facebook may get you fired. Pictures of underage drinking may be unhealthy for university applications.
 
The concern for reputation was one of the salient points of the presentation. She hammered in the idea that everything on the Internet is permanent and public. Everything can be downloaded, saved, linked to, screen-captured, copy-pasted, and so on. She introduced various applications such as PrivacyDefender to help us protect our privacy. Already, a number of my classmates have installed this application. This is ironic, since judging from Robyn Treyvaud’s pessimistic presentation, simply rearranging privacy settings may be futile.
 
Yet, having increased social and personal information on the Internet is not the doom and gloom as presented by Robyn Treyvaud. In economics, more information is a good thing and allows for more rational decision making- no wonder the Internet heralded an “Information Revolution”. Getting rejected from a university due to drunken photos on Facebook is only one side of the coin. The university’s needs have to be considered. Does it really want to admit students below the moral standards enforced by the university? Similarly, doesn’t a firm work better when employees are reliable, rather than disloyal, to their bosses?
 
Yes, careless individuals might get punished for posting too much information on Facebook, but if their character does not match the requirements set by their employers or school, then these individuals have every right to be excluded. Similarly, a student or employee who discovers unsavory details about their prospective school or company has every right to withdraw their applications. Even if the public nature of the Internet does not deter ‘bad behavior’, it can at least reduce the glorification of this ‘bad behavior’ by pushing them underground. Reducing publicity can also reduce peer pressure. Therefore, this danger posed by the Internet is only really a danger towards bad behavior. Besides, what is the proportion of people having dangerously embarrassing pictures of them on the Internet? So far, those rejected from a job or university place are isolated cases. Robyn Treyvaud’s concerns may inspire fear to teenagers, but in reality, only the very few with dangerously embarrassing pictures on the Internet should at all be afraid.
