The “December 14th Uprising” was a spontaneous demonstration against excess workload and the Middle Years Program (MYP). The first public reaction to the “Mermaid Essay” was a Facebook note by Angelina Bishman, posted on December 13th, 9.11PM – a Sunday night. The note listed the number of assessments due within the two weeks before Christmas break. There were only two days without an assessment. In total, 15 significant pieces of work were due, not including a speech festival and the selection of IB Diploma Program Subjects. “On top of this”, she wrote, were sports and co-curricular activities which is necessary for an all-rounded student. She already emailed the list to Ms. Irvine, the Head of Year. By posting the email in public, she wanted to see how many of her peers shared her frustrations. She also urged her yearmates to send their lists of work to apply greater pressure on the administration.
 
The note started a ‘domino effect’ of Year 11s expressing their frustrations over workload and the Middle Years Program (MYP). Since Facebook was (and still is) used by a vast majority of the year, reaction to the note was swift. The first suggestion of a protest was posted at 9.26PM, mere 15 minutes after the original posting of the note. Many commentators asserted that sending lists will not decrease the number of assignments issued. Rather, a public display of grievances was advocated, with a ‘sit-in’ being a common thread. There was only one reactionary commenter, who stated that her workload was “doable”- her list had only two-thirds the number of assessments compared to Angelina’s. All in all, Angelina’s note began the fires of revolt.
 
At 9.50PM, Justin Chan posted “the Rigors of Education”, an English essay. It was an English assignment, where students were given free rein to write a ‘credo’, or a statement of belief. Justin’s belief was that MYP caused “physical and mental toil.” The essay targeted rubrics and reflections, hammering unceasingly against the excesses of MYP. Word choice was strong and visceral, with one sentence stating: “Before one knows it, one may find all their free time vanish after being mysteriously siphoned by the omnipotent tentacles of the MYP overlords.”
 
Justin’s words captured the year group’s anger, garnering immediate and widespread applause. Too explicit for Moongate, the essay was later circulated covertly around the school, akin to the Soviet bloc’s samizdat. At least 50 people ‘liked’ the essay on Facebook- nearly half the year group. The essay was regarded as a ‘manifesto’ by many in the year, and definitely brought anti-MYP sentiment even further to the forefront of attention and resonated with people of all social groupings. As one commenter noted, “See how a good essay has the power to unite those who normally would not hang out together?” But even with all this fervor, few thought action would occur. As late as 10.55pm, Justin Chan privately asserted that a sit-in would have minimal participation, and “amount to nothing”. 
 
Nevertheless, serious discussions were already being held to hold a protest. After a 12-minute telephone conversation, two students set up a Facebook event at 11PM. The event was titled “Enough is Enough”, a concise and catchy slogan. By this time, many proposals have already been put forth, including the idea to skip the Christmas Assembly. The new event focused the course of action and established leaders of the movement. The two organizers planned to silently sit-in in the basketball court every day, during lunch time. People then discussed how to raise attention in the context of a silent sit-in, with ideas including badges, banners, and big-character posters. At 11.25PM, the leaders sent out a mass message, urging “comrades” to bring signs “either indicating the number of hours you have slept one of the nights last week, or a phrase/poster of your liking bringing an issue to the attention of the public.” Already, the movement took a Maoist theme as the Cultural Revolution was being taught in history class. Within the three hours since 9PM, this fiery anti-MYP tide washed across the year group, with 48 people promising to attend the sit-in. As night drew late, there was eager anticipation for the events to come.
