A common and essential feature in the MYP is the reflection process. The content and frequency of a ‘reflection’ differ between subjects. In mathematics, for example, a few in-class tests are issued per year, where the student relates the use of mathematics to realistic situations. In the Arts, reflections have to be done on a class by class basis in Developmental Workbooks, where the student has to write his or her thoughts according to suggested guiding questions. On the other end of the frequency spectrum, there is no reflecting needed in the languages or humanities subjects, at least in terms of grades. Such a disparity seems unfair, for why should only select subjects be reflected upon?
Part of the answer may lie in the nature of a reflection itself, and the practical effects of introducing reflection as a criterion. A good reflection, in all subjects, is usually a piece of writing that effectively communicates the thoughts of the student regarding the subject matter, ideally in a critical manner. In the languages or humanities, the student is already required to write effectively and critically, albeit for different purposes. In all subjects with reflections, the practical component of the subject is not writing, but rather non-verbal skills and concepts, such as athletic ability in PE, and solving quadratic equations in mathematics. By discerning such a difference, the reflection can be seen as a great equalizer. The reflection levels the playing field, as not only does the student have to be naturally gifted, or received extra tutoring, in a subject to achieve good marks, the student has to diligently digest what has occurred in class and communicate it to the teacher. This is why, for example, a student with weaker practical skills can achieve excellent grades by working hard.
Therein lies a problem with the current state of reflecting. While the practical aspect of certain subjects is weighted less than the combined criterion of having good write-ups such as the Developmental Workbook, the student’s attention towards having a good product decreases. For example, the ‘Create’ stage, or the product, of Design Technology and Computer Technology is one-sixth of the total assessment. Even within the ‘Create’ stage, having no process journal will garner a 1 or 2 out of the maximum 6. Students are compelled to write, write and write and pay less attention to the actual product. Exaggeration and verbosity are not uncommon symptoms of the desire to achieve good grades through the path of reflection and evaluation.
Is it truly equitable to award the same level of achievement to someone who has used a few hours of their time to write good reflections, with someone who has dedicated years in learning a specific skill, e.g. learning the violin? Is it really fair that the persons naturally endowed in writing better reflections than others have an advantage in the whole spectrum of MYP, over those naturally endowed in math, science, PE, drama, etc., who have their advantages cancelled out by the introduction of reflections as criterion? These are questions for the MYP students and educators to consider.
