For Project Week, I went to India, in the southwest state of Karnataka. There were 20 students: eight Year 11s and the rest were Year 12s. Leading the trip were CT teachers Mr. Hayes and Ms. Nahar. While it was her first time in Karnataka, Ms. Nahar originated from Goa, also located in southwest India.
We flew overnight onboard Jet Airways, an Indian airline, to Mumbai for transit to Bangalore. Although it seemed lesser known than the ubiquitous Cathay Pacific, Jet Airways’ service was on par, and in some cases even surpassed the level of its Hong Kong counterpart. I entertained myself in the Mumbai terminal with some reading of Dan Brown’s The Lost Symbol as attempts to nap on airport chairs proved futile. We then boarded a smaller, propeller driven airplane that arrived in Bangalore’s modern airport within a few hours in the early morning.
There was some time provided to freshen up, which my roommates and I took advantage of with a shower and some TV. The huge abundance in channels was dazzling, with over seventy to flick through. Whilst we rode a bus to lunch, I was again struck by the many large billboards that plastered new glass buildings. This contrasted heavily with the scenes of small yellow trishaws and skinny road workers without helmets that dominated the streets. Lunch was in UB City, a large commercial project that was as impressive as the spicy, but delicious, food served. Afterwards, we visited a crowded temple. Sadly, no cameras were allowed.
We had to ride a train overnight to Hospet. It was quite an experience, as everyone talked and slept in close quarters on double-bunks, six in compartment. I fortunately took the bottom bunk, as the girls on the top bunks complained of its cramped conditions. From Hospet we visited the Hampi ruins, a UNESCO World Heritage site, for the large part of the next two days. The massive boulders and stone structures were stunning, rivaling the Ancient Roman monuments. We also visited the Tungabhadra Dam, a ‘modern temple’, as the locals called it, due to its enormous impact in the surrounding environment and economy. Meals were mainly in the hotel, and the food not as spicy in Bangalore. Two slices of buttered toast composed of a quick breakfast, followed by temperature checks. We traveled upon two busses, divided mainly amongst year lines. Activities in the bus included sleep, reading, card playing, and watching High School Musical.
