Ban Computers


While the hot topic of the school centers on the issue of bags, we are forgetting another terrifying, yet ubiquitous, facet of our life - computers.


Computers should be banned.


Like bags, computers menace us in three areas: health, security, and safety.


Computers are bad for health. Whereas bags harm our posture through a few heavy books, using a computer means sitting hunched on a chair, hours on end, staring at a screen. The tender, developing spines of students must never be compromised. In addition, computers can especially harm teenagers as the Internet necessarily destroys any sense of time management. Sleep, school and social activities automatically become secondary, all of which are integral to proper growth. By banning computers, we can prevent Year 7 students from the inevitable procrastination of using the Internet when they should be focused on work. A computer ban will help Year 7s effectively organize time- which is not only an important school habit, but also a life habit.


Regarding security, identity theft on the Internet has been a growing issue throughout the world. Social network users, especially teenagers, post up their whole identities online, not only in text, but also through videos and pictures. This has been done despite repeated warnings to post limited personal information on sites like Facebook. Predators can easily impersonate any one of our friends, possibly for fraudulent uses, or even for direct psychological abuse. There have been several incidents over the past year where I have received phishing links from my classmates’ hacked email accounts. Banning computers will easily prevent a modern form of theft.


Safety is a final concern surrounding computers. Whilst bags merely inhibit fire escape routes, computers can be the cause of fires! After all, computers require electricity and are a fire hazard by default. There is an issue of many computers being fit into small room such as a computer technology classroom, as the fire risks would multiply greatly. I recall a case a few years ago when my friend ‘blew up a computer’ merely by inserting the wrong plug to the wrong socket on a computer. Fortunately, no fire was caused, but it was definitely a near-miss. As recently as two weeks ago, the Student Council had to put down a small fire during the start-of-school dance when a plug short-circuited.  Banning computers will undoubtedly remove a dangerous fire hazard.


Compromises can certainly be made with the student body to ease an abrupt ban on computers. To substitute for Google and Wikipedia, several sets of the rarely used Encyclopedia Britannica can be housed in the to-be obsolete Computer Technology classrooms. Free typewriters can be issued so that students may hand in clear and legible work. Small lockers can be replaced with larger ones to provide more room for the inevitable use of larger stacks of paper-based research and homework. Ultimately, what is needed is a positive attitude to make a ban on computers effective.  
