Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold.  I had half a mind to spend it
by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to Wuthering
Heights.  On coming up from dinner, however, (N.B.--I dine between twelve
and one o'clock; the housekeeper, a matronly lady, taken as a fixture
along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend my request that
I might be served at five)--on mounting the stairs with this lazy
intention, and stepping into the room, I saw a servant-girl on her knees
surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an infernal dust as
she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.  This spectacle drove
me back immediately; I took my hat, and, after a four-miles' walk,
arrived at Heathcliff's garden-gate just in time to escape the first
feathery flakes of a snow-shower.

On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black frost, and the air
made me shiver through every limb.  Being unable to remove the chain, I
jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered with
straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till my
knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.

'Wretched inmates!' I ejaculated, mentally, 'you deserve perpetual
isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality.  At least, I
would not keep my doors barred in the day-time.  I don't care--I will get
in!'  So resolved, I grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.  Vinegar-
faced Joseph projected his head from a round window of the barn.

'What are ye for?' he shouted.  'T' maister's down i' t' fowld.  Go round
by th' end o' t' laith, if ye went to spake to him.'

'Is there nobody inside to open the door?' I hallooed, responsively.

'There's nobbut t' missis; and shoo'll not oppen 't an ye mak' yer
flaysome dins till neeght.'

'Why?  Cannot you tell her whom I am, eh, Joseph?'

'Nor-ne me!  I'll hae no hend wi't,' muttered the head, vanishing.

The snow began to drive thickly.  I seized the handle to essay another
trial; when a young man without coat, and shouldering a pitchfork,
appeared in the yard behind.  He hailed me to follow him, and, after
marching through a wash-house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed,
pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
apartment where I was formerly received.  It glowed delightfully in the
radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and near
the table, laid for a plentiful evening meal, I was pleased to observe
the 'missis,' an individual whose existence I had never previously
suspected.  I bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me take a seat.
She looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained motionless and
mute.

'Rough weather!' I remarked.  'I'm afraid, Mrs. Heathcliff, the door must
bear the consequence of your servants' leisure attendance: I had hard
work to make them hear me.'

She never opened her mouth.  I stared--she stared also: at any rate, she
kept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless manner, exceedingly
embarrassing and disagreeable.